Austin Herring
CS T680: Evolution of Computing
PDP-8 Assembly Program
March 26, 2017

The provided file pdp8.ini is a script for the SIMH PDP-8 simulator. It loads all
of the appropriate machine code and program data values into memory to run a
program that will take user input to calculate the given triangular number by doing
summing (and not by using the closed-form).

After compiling the SIMH pdp8 program, simply placing pdp8.ini in the directory an
running pdp8 will run the script and start executing the triangular number program
It will output a prompt:
	ENTER 2 DIGITS
at which point the user can enter two decimal digits using the keyboard. Note that
even if the number is less than ten, it must still be entered as '0d'. Also note
that no error checking will be done, so if non-digit characters are input,
erroneous results may be reported. Finally, note that the program will not echo
the typed characters.

The program will then compute that triangular number and output it (in decimal),
including leading 0s if it has less than 4 significant digits. Note that because
of the 12-bit word size of the PDP-8, only the triangular numbers up to 90 will be
calculated correctly; the 90th triangular number is 4095, so anything above that
will overflow back to 0. For these results to be accurate, 4096 must be added to
the final output value.

If unfamiliar with the SIMH simulator or its scripting language, the main purpose
of the script is to deposit the correct values in the correct memory locations;
each "d" command in the script does this. The first argument is the memory
location, in octal, and the second argument is the value, in octal. This means
that the machine code for the program can be read by simply scanning down the
d commands, determining which instruction is located in which location. The file
has been organized to facilitate such reading, with each d command storing a value
in a successive memory location, starting with memory location 0200, the beginning
of the program. The program also has some static data values, which are stored with
d commands under the "PROGRAM DATA" header.
